The Joe Rogan experience.
When people talk about issues in this country, there's a,
there's a giant, there's a giant divide with,
with one thing in particular, and that is mass shootings, uh,
mass shootings and gun control.
There's a giant divide between people that are second amendment advocates and
people that want to round up all the assault weapons and take away all the guns.
And they think that guns are the problem. When you see this
pretty disturbing increase in mass shootings in this country,
what is, what is your take on it? And what do you think could be done?
Well, it's awful. Um, they're terrorist attacks, and I think,
I think it's safer to call them that, uh, the, the weather,
depending on how you define a mass shooting. Um, now you define,
when we look at murder statistics, we're actually at a very,
very low point in our history. I mean, look at the early nineties,
it was vastly more murders by gun, uh,
than we have now as just statistically speaking. What's.
That because of this, do they know.
There was a massive kind of war on crime? I think in the nineties, uh,
increase in police, you know, you have the,
some of the crime bills that went through,
which were obviously the source of a lot of debate right now in the Democrat
primary. And, uh, yeah, it just, it was just, there was a, there was, uh,
an approach to fix that. Okay. You know, tackling gang violence,
tackling all of these things. And, uh, we, we live in a much,
even though you wouldn't think so because of these kinds of theatrical, again,
they're, they're terrorist attacks. I don't know what else to call them, uh,
because, because the person doing and is trying to commit terror. Right. And,
uh, you know, for different reasons of course, but, but there are,
they at least they attach themselves to some kind of reason, but in the end,
they're, they're angry at something. And they're, they're probably, you know,
probably have been taking some kind of psychotropic drugs over time and they've
gotten to this point and they'll attach themselves to whatever reason they need
to do this. And it's awful. Um, so, you know, how do you fix that?
Um, we have to understand the problem. We have to diagnose it. And, um,
and then we got it and I think we have to be realistic about what the solutions
really are and what our ability to influence those outcomes really is.
And that's a, that's an emotional conversation for people. Uh, you know, we've,
we've been dealing with for the last few weeks, of course. I mean, it's, it's,
it's front and center, um, in the debate. And so, but we gotta have it.
What can be done.
Yeah. Um, well, the, the,
so obviously the reaction by many is to go after the tool, right.
To go after the guns. Um, I don't think that's the right approach.
It's not, it's not, again,
it's not clear that that would actually solve the problem. There's, there's two,
there's two main requirements. When you're looking at, uh,
an approach to gun control. It's like,
does it infringe on law-abiding citizens rights? Number one,
what's the answer to that? And two,
is it going to actually affect the outcome that we're trying to affect?
Is it gonna feel, or is it going to do good? Okay.
And I think the vast majority of proposals, um,
failed both of those standards. They, they definitely infringed on law,
abiding citizens rights, and they probably wouldn't even solve the problem.
You know, look at examples, assault rifles, or let's not, well, Hey ours. Okay.
They're called assault rifles. They're really,
the reason they're in AR is because they're called ArmaLite. That's a brand, um,
assault rifle is not a, is not a real thing. It's not a real definition. And,
um, but what if you banned them? Well,
rifles are responsible for less than 3% of all gun deaths, about 2.6,
6% of all gun deaths. Okay. Hammers and knives, I think are, are,
are responsible for far more deaths. Um, so yes,
the hammers.
And knives are responsible for more deaths and rifles got statistics, including.
AR in the back. Yeah, really? Yeah. Rifles account for four,
2.6, 6% of people with hammers. I mean, it's a good weapon.
I guess.
I feel if somebody has a hammer of all you have is a hammer. Well.
But yeah, if you have a gun yeah.
Pretty well. Even if you don't have a gun, I feel like I could stop my hammer.
Yeah. But you're a pretty good fighter. got an AR.
Well, that's not true. I can take away your AR if you're frowning, you know,
how close do you have to be to do that? You just got to reach it.
It's very easy to take away an AR. Yeah. Yeah.
How easy.
I just, I just need to get a hand on the barrel.
Can I [inaudible] classes. Yeah, I know. And I've taken those classes.
That's why I know it's so easy. Whoever controls the barrel of any gun controls,
the gun. People don't quite realize that they think if they're gripping it,
then they control the gun. That's not true. Right. Um,
we can weeds now the way that we can demonstrate that. Yeah. Afterwards. So.
Flame thrower maybe rubbed up. Yeah. No rifles.
Is that what that I was seeing on? My sure. What that was.
Are you going to take a picture with that later? Okay.
Can I, can I actually use it though? Yeah.
We can turn it on. As long as you don't cook the ceiling.
Okay. But I can cook anything else. Yeah. You'll be the only one.
Who's ever turned it on here. Other than Ilan.
It doesn't have to be in the room, but yeah, it does though.
Picture do it in the room. Um,
so have you thought about this? I mean, if you,
if you had a magic wand and they said, Hey, Dan Cranshaw,
what can you do to solve this mass gun violence?
What can you do to solve these mass shootings?
Yeah. I mean,
you have to target the source of them and it's just not an easy conversation.
Right. And so this let's also think about where these things started.
They were talking about the theatrical mass shootings.
There's a lot of statistics out there. They'll say we have hundreds of them,
you know, which include four or more deaths,
but these are usually gang violence. So gang violence is,
it's a it's in a category. Right.
Just to do, I believe there was 279 mass shootings so far this year.
And some of them, they do include gang violence. Right.
I think it's two or more. Is that what it's deemed mass shootings. Yeah.
It might be more, which is so weird that we have a statistic. Well,
that doesn't count. It's only. Yeah. Yeah.
I mean, you gotta draw the line somewhere. You gotta,
you gotta be able to analyze if you're going to analyze it, you have to,
to have to look into that. But the, these themes,
I think the kind of dramatize shootings that these, that these guys are doing,
and it all started with Columbine and it's become this sort of copycat crime
that has occurred over time. And it, like, we didn't have this before that.
And I think that's interesting. I think it's something to take note of. Um,
and it, and it's not clear what you do about that. Um, you, you have to,
you don't have to look for signs, uh, people before they do it. And, uh,
so one bill that I'm on,
which is there's is I've taken a lot of fire for it because of the people are
just, I think, misunderstand what it actually is, is the taps act,
which is the threat assessment, uh, prevention and safety act.
All this does is give local law enforcement the ability to apply for grants,
to get training and, and behavioral threat assessment, training,
and data analytical tools to identify these threats beforehand.
And people that are opposed to it. They look at it like red flag laws. They,
they.
They combine those two quite a bit. And that's just, that's just not,
it's not true. I mean,
th the taps act doesn't actually have anything to do with guns.
And red flag laws, depending on how they're implemented,
could take someone who looks like they're erratic,
or who has a pension for violence. And they will say,
you do not have access to guns.
Right. In theory, that would, that would be how they work. And, um, they,
they would fill a gap. I think in it, it depends on the state.
Some states have all the ability,
they need to see threatening behavior and then arrest that person. Uh,
but it depends on criminal law within that state. So I theoretically,
a red flag I would, would fill, fill that gap.
The concern with red flag laws obviously is, is there really due process?
A lot of people hear that and they're like, okay,
that means my neighbor can tell on me and they're going to get my guns the next
morning. Well, yeah. I mean, if that's how the law was written, then yeah.
You better be against that because that's a terrible law. Um, and, and,
and to be fair to a lot of the people who, who don't like red flag laws,
they see how these are written in a lot of states and in California has one.
And, uh,
and they see how there's a written and they say this doesn't protect due
process. How can we possibly, before this, um,
that on the other hand, there hasn't been any cases where there's,
there's been some obvious abuse of that law either. So, um, you know,
I've encouraged the conversation.
I think the conversation has to happen at the state level because every state
has different criminal law and that's where criminal law happens. It's it it's,
uh, it does not happen at the federal.
Level. The only other controversial, uh,
approach that I've heard is, uh,
putting armed police or soldiers at schools,
which is like that,
that seems incredibly disturbing to me that you have to have people look,
I'm not opposed to it,
but it's disturbing to me that you would have to have someone standing by
ready for violence. Well, we have.
Guards everywhere. Why not our schools, um, because we've never.
Had them before. And it's sort of signaling that.
We've reached this point of impasse where we have to do something about it,
and we're not doing anything to prevent these things from happening.
What we're doing is protecting the people that are going to be there when these
things happen.
Yeah. I think inner city schools have long had police presence there.
So it's not, it's not, I don't think it's totally new. Um, the idea,
and I think we could rapidly get used to it. Uh,
there's a good argument to be made that gun-free zones are the first thing that
are attacked too. So, I mean, you know,
it's a counterintuitive response to this, but it's, it's true.
If I'm going to commit a terrible act. I w of course,
you're going to go to the place where, you know, nobody's caring. Yeah.
You're not going to a gun show. Right.
Uh let's you were just really, really looking for a fight. Um, but, uh,
th th that's, that's, there's some truth to that. And it's, it's just hard.
It's so hard for people to have this conversation,
because it's so emotional and there's a cultural Fisher here too.
There's there's, some people don't understand some people who like guns, right.
And there's, there's a cultural divide there. Yeah.
And I just don't like people who like guns, you know, that's, we have to admit,
that's true.
They'd have this idea of guns that guns bring violence and violent.
People want guns. And that that's just not true.
And one of the things that people like to gloss over is how many people have
defended their life and defended the lives of their loved ones with guns in this
country. Every year, it happens all the time. I've.
Got a whole list of stats and examples that I'm sure I could read to you right.
Now. One of the things that gets brought up during gun violence, statistics,
and talk about how many people die from firearms every year in this country,
they're also talking about people who've defending their lives and defending the
lives of their loved ones.
People get their houses broken into all the time by armed criminals.
And they shoot those people and they lay live to see another day and that person
dies. And that is the whole reason why people don't want to get rid of guns.
Right. And I want.
To bring something up along those lines.
So it's far more likely in countries like great Britain that you'll get your
house broken into while you are,
they're far more likely than in the United States. Like about by a,
by a good order of magnitude actually. So that, that the, why is that? Right?
Because they know that there is no gun in that house. Right.
And you do that in Texas. There's a good chance. There's a gun in that house.
A hundred percent. Yeah. Even the liberals.
If you don't have a gun, take one of mine out a gun.
So, so that's important and interesting point. The other,
the other good statistical analysis to do is okay, well,
when there's high amount of concealed carry, what does that do to crime rates?
And, and the correlation is there's less crime. Okay. Now,
now it's not fair to say that's a causation. That would be,
it would be intellectually dishonest, but it's an important co-relation to know.
It's also important to note, okay.
Per capita places like Switzerland in Israel have far,
far more gun ownership than we do. People don't realize that. Is that true?
Oh yeah. I wouldn't switch. I wouldn't come in here and lie to you.
I know, but I'm stunned as a retort.
Because of the, now, now somebody would counter-argue in that. So say know,
those are, those are government weapons to people. Yeah. Fine.
But they still are with the people like the people have the guns. Okay.
And they're at a rate higher than the United States. And there's like, yeah.
Yeah.
But that's how they stay neutral so that they have almost no crime,
almost no crime Israel to almost no crime. Um,
except for the obvious issues that Israel has in general with the Palestinian
Israeli conflict. But as it does a criminal act,
like they have very little crimes, like this is interesting.
So you combine that with what we know about concealed carry data here in the
United States, you know, how do you solve this problem?
The other thing to think about is, um, the, the vast majority,
over 50% of all gun crime, it happens in like 2% of all counties.
So it's highly concentrated. You can, you can.
So as we look to solve this problem, like we,
we do have to really peel back some layers here,
like who is committing to the crop, where is it happening? Why is it happening?
Um, you know, we can attack the tools, but it's just,
it's so far from self-evident that that would work again, going back to ARS,
they're responsible for less than 3% of gun deaths.
And also let's say you banned them. Are you actually stopping 3% of gun deaths?
No. Cause why don't they just use another gun?
Why don't they use a different weapon, one of these, a truck, like they can use,
if they want to kill, they can kill the,
the horror that we're seeing is that they like to kill this way.
And maybe that's w why is that? And again, I go back to Columbine.
It all started with that. And that's interesting. We should look at that.
And like, what is driving people to like that?
Well, I think there are a lot of people. I mean, if you look at mass shootings,
a lot of these people, when you read their description,
they're very disenfranchised. They're very angry.
And when you're disenfranchised and very angry, there's like an archetype,
right?
There's an image that you have in your mind of shooting all these people that
wronged you. I mean, this is a.
It goes back to our victim hood conversation or blame somebody else.
And then the real conversation is how many of these people are on psychotropic
drugs and what are those, what are those drugs?
And what are the effects that those drugs have on people? Well,
when you look at the numbers, it's stunning.
Whether it's anti-anxiety medications or SSRS or amphetamines,
or whether it's whatever they're on,
that alters the chemical frequency or the camera,
or the biological structure of your brain in terms of like what chemicals are in
there, serotonin dopamine,
these speeds that so many kids are on Adderall and
various types of speed. That's tough.
Radically changes the way you look at the world. Yeah.
How many of those drugs contribute or are a
factor in these mass killings?
I don't know if correlation equals causation,
but I do know the correlation is phenomenally high. Yeah. I mean,
I think it's enough. Well.
His homes, things like that. Sure. Let's, let's start analyzing it.
In cells, which is a new word, involuntary celibates. Do you know about, huh?
You didn't know about that. I taught you about entails.
You just look amazing.
Yeah.
There's whole groups online on message boards that they can't believe they can't
get laid.
Oh. And they just go voluntarily involuntary sites.
They're just guys who can't get laid. Yeah. That's just a fancy word for that.
Yeah. Let's not call them losers. That's what makes them crazy. If there's.
A game there's winners and that a high school football
quarterback was banging all the cheerleaders that guy's a winner.
It sucks that, yeah, that's true. But you know, yeah. It is unfair,
you know, I'm, I'm hoping genetic engineering fixes all that future,
but you know, this is what you're dealing with. A lot of times, it's these,
these guys that got a really roll the dice and that's,
there's no other way to describe it.
They they'd got handed a terrible hand of cards. Right.
And some of them are pilled up and angry and abused and they have
access to guns. And then next thing you know, there's a mass.
Shooter, right. And then again, going back to the victim of a conversation,
they, maybe they did were dealt a bad hand,
but they also tell themselves the wrong story about why that is and who's to
blame. And, uh, it's, it's that narrative just seeps within them.
And it creates this. I mean, the drafts, we write it.
I is when Bernie Sanders was on here,
there was one thing I thought I agreed with him on,
which is we have to look at the effects of these drugs and like really what they
are. I don't see anything wrong with that. I think that's.
True. It's amazing how much blow back you get from that.
And it's by people that want to look at the guns. They just want to say no, no,
no, no. Why are you talking about psychotropic drugs? It's the guns? No,
I'm talking about the guns too. I mean,
I don't necessarily think that really angry,
volatile people that have criminal records should have guns.
I think they shouldn't. Right. So the guns are already out loud. Yes we do.
And we probably should, you know,
have some understanding of who you are before we give you a gun.
The real question is what,
what is that understanding and how do we go about doing that?
And how do we keep people from making these incredibly rigid rules? I mean,
particularly regionally, right?
If you have states that decide to have incredibly rigid rules that preclude most
people from having guns. Yeah. I mean,
that can be possible if they devise their own tests.
And you're honest about your perspectives on things, and that's.
The fear, and it's an honest fear to have, because what is the limit? You know,
if you're on psychotropic drugs, seed, you be barred from having weapons,
of course not. Uh, you know, and, and, and, and how do you,
how do you manage that? And the way we do it now, again,
you have to have committed a crime of some sorts. So there's,
there's other things too, if you abuse medication, if you abuse, uh,
yeah. Medication, then I think you're also, I think in according to federal law,
like you're, you're, you're barred from, from, from owning that, you know,
that's in the system, uh, I think dishonorable discharge from the military,
things like that. So there's,
there's already a lot of standards that actually precludes you from buying a
weapon. And, uh, there's, uh, there's,
there would be a very vigorous debate on how you add more standards to that.
Honorable.
Discharge keeps you from buying a weapon. That's what I've.
Read. We can fact check that, but that's interesting.
I didn't know that when I thought you had to have a felony Hmm. Maybe,
um, may make sense, but it's, there's no answers.
And this is the thing that domestic abuse too. I came up with from,
is there something Jamie? Yeah.
Dishonorable discharge and NFA. What's an NFA firearm, uh,
NFA.
Refers to the national firearms act.
So that's what ban like automatic weapons based.
On yeah. General court martial conviction,
a person who was convicted of a crime that is punishable by imprisonment for,
uh, more than one year, including dishonorable discharge is prohibited.
From yes. Okay.
That's what it is. So it is true. So if you're imprisoned, not just a dishonor.
Yeah, yeah. It would be, it would,
there's a lot of people dishonorably discharged. They're probably not, not,
not violently. You know, they're not violent offenders.
[Inaudible] talking to you talking to Bernie and talking to Tulsi,
talking to everybody. Nobody has a solution. I mean, well,
all the brightest minds that are thinking about this all the time,
no one has one thing that makes sense.
Into a very deep question about what our Cape.
And I think I've briefly touched on this before.
Like why does government exist and what are we capable of solving and what needs
to be solved by ourselves? You know, there are there in,
in what is just inherent to human nature and it's evil and we hate it and we
don't want it to be there, but it is. And, and, and is it,
is it appropriate for us to scream to our politicians as they save us?
And sometimes it is sometimes we can solve it. We should try, but we have to,
we have to do it with some kind of constrained vision as Thomas soul would put
it about what is possible.
And then let's be reasonable about what is possible and, and, and,
and hit those two categories. I said,
are we infringing on the rights of everyone, uh, for the sake of doing this,
and second, is it going to actually solve the problem?
And those are very important questions.
And if we don't frame the debate within those, I think we're, we're, we're,
we're not doing, we're not doing justice to the, to the problem itself.
True. But again,
no one seems to have any logical course,
any logical clear path, like this is how we're gonna reduce gun violence.
This is how we're going to stop mass shootings. I mean,
other than arming all these public places, I was in Rome recently. And,
uh, when you go there, it's stunning. It's military vehicles guys with guns,
just strapped, ready to rock, just standing by yeah. All over the place.
And it was like, used to be that way. No, it didn't. And I was like, wow,
this is a very, uh, it's, you know,
you're trying to enjoy yourself when you're on vacation,
you checking all these ancient buildings. And then you're like, oh, guns,
military tank, look at that, you know? Yeah. And it's.
I wish it wasn't that way. Yeah. You know, and, uh, but again,
like w you know, you're right. We don't, we,
we haven't come up with perfect solutions.
We have some ideas that I think would mitigate these threats. And we've been,
we've discussed those at length. Uh, but none of.
Them seem tangible. Everything seems like, just talk.
Well, apps act that I talked about, I think is perfectly tangible. Again,
it's not a, they won't solve everything, but it mitigates something, I think,
armed security at schools,
I think certainly mitigates things as far as school safety goes. So I don't,
I don't, I don't think it's just talk. I think those are tangible things. And I,
I think they're perfectly reasonable. Um, you know.
We're so reluctant to think that we need armed guards at school,
and I understand it. And I'm thinking about it myself more.
So really what it's going to take is armed guards at school.
I went to high school in Bogota, Columbia. So we had armed like a lot.
[Inaudible] tomato.
Oil, business, oil, oil, petroleum engineer. Yeah. So we moved to my,
my life growing up was between Houston and overseas back and forth.
That'd be very bizarre. Yeah. It was fun. I mean, I don't regret a minute of it.
It can be hard at times. Um, moving around a lot, it used to be better.
It's not bad. I'll do an interview in Spanish.
So it's really not bad by any means, but it's not great.
So you can go into a Taqueria and hang.
Out. We totally hang. I speak. I speak really well, conversational Spanish,
my Spanish, it's harder when I'm talking complex policy issues,
because I didn't learn that kind of Spanish. Right, right, right. So, but yeah,
I have pretty good. Yeah.